docs: add community plugins docs (#181)
TanStack/ai: docs/community-adapters/guide.md

--- 
title: "Community Adapters Guide"
slug: /community-adapters/guide
order: 1
---

# Community Adapters Guide

In this guide, you'll learn how to create and contribute community adapters for the TanStack AI ecosystem. Community adapters allow you to extend the functionality of TanStack AI by integrating with various services, APIs, or custom logic.

## What is a Community Adapter?

A community adapter is a reusable module that connects TanStack AI with external services or APIs. These adapters can handle tasks such as connecting to different AI models, managing data sources, or implementing custom tools.

These are not maintained by the core TanStack AI team but are contributed by the community. They can be shared and reused across different projects.

## Creating a Community Adapter

> To create a community adapter, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a community adapter:
```

> To create a community adapter, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the steps below to build a well-structured, type-safe adapter.

```

> 1. **Set Up Your Project**: The best way to do that is to check out our internal adapter implementations in the [TanStack AI GitHub repository](https://github.com/tanstack/ai/tree/main/packages/typescript). You can use these as a reference for your own adapter and the most detailed implementation is the [OpenAI adapter](https://github.com/tanstack/ai/tree/main/packages/typescript/ai-openai).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Set up your project

Start by reviewing the [existing internal adapter implementations in the TanStack AI GitHub repository](https://github.com/tanstack/ai/tree/main/packages/typescript). These define the expected structure, conventions, and integration patterns.

For a complete, detailed reference, use the [OpenAI adapter]((https://github.com/tanstack/ai/tree/main/packages/typescript/ai-openai), which is the most fully featured implementation.

```

  GPT_IMAGE_1.name,
  GPT_IMAGE_1_MINI.name,
  DALL_E_3.name,
  DALL_E_2.name,
] as const

export const OPENAI_VIDEO_MODELS = [SORA2.name, SORA2_PRO.name] as const
```
4. **Define the model provider options**: Every model has different configuration options that users can set when using the model. After you define the model metadata, you need to implement the provider options the model supports. Generally you want to do something like this:
```typescript
export type OpenAIChatModelProviderOptionsByName = {
  [GPT5_2.name]: OpenAIBaseOptions &
    OpenAIReasoningOptions &
    OpenAIStructuredOutputOptions &
    OpenAIToolsOptions &
    OpenAIStreamingOptions &
    OpenAIMetadataOptions
  [GPT5_2_CHAT.name]: OpenAIBaseOptions &
    OpenAIReasoningOptions &
    OpenAIStructuredOutputOptions &
    OpenAIToolsOptions &
    OpenAIStreamingOptions &
    OpenAIMetadataOptions
  // ... repeat for each model
}

```
5. **Define the model input modalities**: Every model usually supports different input modalities (like text, images, etc). After you define the model metadata, you need to implement the input modalities the model supports. Generally you want to

> do something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures strict type safety and feature correctness at compile time.

### 5. Define supported input modalities

Models typically support different input modalities (e.g. text, images, audio). These must be defined per model to prevent invalid usage.

Example:
```

```typescript
export interface OpenAIBaseOptions {
  // base options that every chat model supports
}

// Feature fragments that can be stitched per-model 

/**
 * Reasoning options for models  
 */
export interface OpenAIReasoningOptions {
   //...
}
 
/**
 * Structured output options for models.
 */
export interface OpenAIStructuredOutputOptions {
  //...
}
```

What you are going for is very specific to the adapter you are building so there is no one-size-fits-all example here.
But the general rule of thumb is that you have the base options that every model supports and then you have feature fragments that can be stitched together per-model.

Here's an example of one of the gpt models that supports every feature:
```typescript
export type OpenAIChatModelProviderOptionsByName = {
  [GPT5_2.name]: OpenAIBaseOptions &
    OpenAIReasoningOptions &
    OpenAIStructuredOutputOptions &
    OpenAIToolsOptions &
    OpenAIStreamingOptions &
    OpenAIMetadataOptions
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There is no single correct composition; this structure should reflect the capabilities of the provider you are integrating.

```

7. **Implement the model logic**: Finally, you need to implement the actual logic for your adapter. This includes handling requests to the external service, processing responses, and integrating with TanStack AI's APIs. You can refer to the [OpenAI adapter implementation](https://github.com/TanStack/ai/blob/main/packages/typescript/ai-openai/src/adapters/text.ts) for a detailed example. What's important here is to make sure you properly type the inputs and outputs based on the model options you defined earlier. Every functionality is split per adapter, so make sure to implement the text adapter, chat adapter, image adapter, etc as needed.

> 8. **Publish your package and open up a PR**: Once your adapter is complete and tested, you can publish it as an npm package and open up a PR to the [TanStack AI repository](https://github.com/TanStack/ai/pulls) to have it listed in the community adapters section of the documentation. Add it into [here](https://github.com/TanStack/ai/tree/main/docs/community-adapters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8. Publish and submit a PR

Once your adapter is complete:
1. Publish it as an npm package
2. Open a PR to the [TanStack AI repository](https://github.com/TanStack/ai/pulls)
3. Add your adapter to the [Community Adapters list in the documentation](https://github.com/TanStack/ai/tree/main/docs/community-adapters)
```
